[Music]
[Applause]
inspires innovation in the waning hours
of February 17th 2019 a youtuber under
the alias of Matt's what it is uploaded
a video that would send shockwaves
across the entire site by morning the
video would reach the front page of
Reddit accumulating millions of views on
YouTube
all of a sudden waves of outrage
inundate every corner of the web YouTube
now faces ferocious controversy over
Matt's allegations that the platform is
wilfully harboring child predators
YouTube reacts swiftly by deactivating
the comment sections of thousands of
child oriented channels their efforts to
subdue the mounting outrage would prove
futile as the controversy was now
spiraling out of control over the next
five days no fewer than 70 articles
report on YouTube's child endangerment
problem at around the same time
companies begin pulling their ads
McDonald's Disney Nestle AT&T Epic Games
some of YouTube's biggest corporate
partners withdraw their funding ad rates
falters site-wide youtubers scramble for
answers the whole platform is tumbling
down a spiral of outraged parents
ravenous reporters and terrified
advertisers all led by a single
red-haired stranger then just as quickly
as he appeared he vanished never to
return now more than a year afterwards
we are only just beginning to pick up
the pieces
[Music]
first we have to talk about the man
behind the mayhem Matt Watson a common
ordinary name for a common ordinary man
you see the best thing about being
ordinary is that it's really easy to
blend in with the rest of the crowd and
in the YouTube community nobody had any
idea who Matt Watson was no one had any
contact with him on twitter facebook
instagram discord the guy was a total
outsider simple online searches for the
stranger revealed a few other past
social media accounts with limited
information the most substantial
discovery would be his former youtube
channel a channel that housed some
rather strange videos but all things
considered Matt's old videos only raised
more questions than they answered
ultimately they provided no further
details about his identity occupation or
greater purpose on the platform when the
time came he stormed into YouTube as an
army of one
but prepared to recruit many others to
his cause
[Music]
YouTube wake up the brick in the window
that started the riot ground zero of
YouTube's worst meltdown yet a video
that left many of its viewers red in the
face and ready to burn the site to the
ground but amidst the anger chaos and
disgust many lost sight of whether the
video was actually accurate at a glance
Matt's efforts seemed noble enough child
predation is the universally scorned
activity and Matt was doing his civic
duty by alerting the greater public of a
rather egregious example the issues of
Matt's video and his subsequent
livestream stemmed from his odd
mischaracterizations of YouTube and the
YouTube community as a whole
several of the implications in the video
range from deceptive to outright lies
about the platform and its creators to
the average layman the video may have
seemed perfectly fine but two seasoned
YouTube veterans these issues became a
lot more apparent first and foremost the
video is predicated entirely on the
point that YouTube is facilitating a
rabbit hole of content that connects bad
actors with unsuspecting children and
each other I have discovered a wormhole
to that I can find this wormhole
wormhole wormhole two klicks I'm now in
the wormhole once you enter into this
wormhole now there is no other content
available the way Matt presents this the
audience is left to assume that YouTube
is either grossly negligent or worse
intentionally aiding child exploitation
on the platform and while youtubers
certainly know Saints in this regard
specifically highlighting these videos
and comments as a wormhole of scum and
villainy is deceptive because it
overlooks the fundamental directive of
the general video recommendation
algorithm on YouTube once you enter into
this wormhole for whatever reason
YouTube's algorithm is glitching out to
a point that nothing but these videos
exist if you look up any category of
video on YouTube the algorithm will
recommend you more videos like it this
applies to cartoons basketball mukbang
ASMR boss removal videos anything you
enjoy watching its the algorithms job to
indiscriminately serve you more videos
that will keep you on the site the key
word being indiscriminate the algorithm
doesn't know morality its job is not to
tell you if what you're watching is
ethically wrong it's only purpose is to
deduce what you like watching and give
you more of it
the problem with Matt's video is that he
presents an incredibly myopic view of
the algorithm by highlighting only its
capacity for abuse by bad actors and he
makes they do you know why are you
watching bikini haul videos who cares
that's besides the point here who cares
that's besides the point here a deeper
dive into YouTube will reveal a variety
of dark disturbing and macabre wormholes
YouTube is not facilitating the abuse of
baby monkeys for example these wormholes
only exist because of the strange users
who inhabit them it is the people who
abuse this framework that create the
wormhole YouTube only provides the
framework and expecting them to manually
patrol the activities of billions of
independent users is simply impossible
but therein lies the issue with Matt's
video Matt portrays the wormhole as if
it's YouTube's direct responsibility
Matt implies it's YouTube's fault that
predators are on the platform and
therefore that YouTube deserves to be
punished I want nothing to do with this
platform I'm disgusted I'm angry so in a
way I want YouTube to pay is it really
YouTube's fault that unsupervised
children ignore YouTube's minimum age
requirement to upload videos of
themselves
is it YouTube's fault that foolish
parents post videos of their children to
a public platform for the whole world to
see she's so cute I love children look
at my kids are we supposed to expect
YouTube to moderate the comments
sections of each and every video as if
the individual uploaders are unable to
do so themselves YouTube has made its
fair share of missteps in its handling
of children on the platform many of
which I've personally criticized before
but in this video Matt heavily implies
that YouTube is totally indifferent
towards child endangerment and
they essentially allow predators to have
a field day on the platform like how is
YouTube not doing anything about any of
this
they're flaunting the fact that YouTube
is doing nothing about this how is this
not a violation of their terms of
service how are they not doing more
that's disgusting and nobody's doing
anything about it this is a blatantly
false narrative and can be disproven
using events that happened the very week
before Matt uploaded his video the week
of February 15th multiple channels were
terminated by YouTube without warning
they would later find out that they were
unjust victims of a new YouTube
initiative to remove videos with CP in
the title it just so happens that in
this case they forgot to whitelist
videos about Club Penguin and Pokemon go
combat points was YouTube's decision
clumsy and misguided yes absolutely but
to claim that YouTube isn't trying to
combat child endangerment on the
platform is simply dishonest this would
pop up this would load and you would see
that there is looking ok there was some
sort of unusual behavior going on here
there's some sort of glitch in the
algorithm
not only does Matt mislead the audience
about YouTube's efforts he then goes on
to misrepresent the entire YouTube
community Matt ends his expose with a
montage of youtubers complaining about D
monetization which is intended to paint
youtubers as self-centered and oblivious
to the real problem on the platform when
confronted about his questionable claims
on his subsequent live streams Matt will
get very defensive and often retort with
the claim that youtubers are purposely
ignoring child endangerment because they
are motivated only by their own selfish
greed that is literally your perspective
your perspective is put my monetization
frankly they don't probably don't want
to admit it but they care more about
money than they do about the fact that
there's a there's an easily exploitable
ring of creepy child videos on YouTube
they care more about money and I'm not
when I say they I'm not talking about
YouTube I'm talking about these [__]
youtubers or salty as well just admit it
you're salty this was an oddly ignorant
and divisive stance considering that
many high-profile channels have
dedicated videos to combating child
endangerment on the platform channels
like nerd city h3 h3 PewDiePie and
pyrocynical have all exposed predatory
content pyrocynical acts
led to an entire wing of abusive content
getting shut down paradoxically Matt
seems ignorant of this fact
Yeti includes many of these same
channels in his video while
simultaneously shaming them for not
caring about the issue so does Matt
watch these channels or not does he only
pay attention to them specifically when
they're complaining about getting
demonetised Matt's confrontational view
of the YouTube community is so baffling
that it becomes suspicious
what would Matt have to gain by throwing
the entire YouTube community under the
bus I thought the issue here is child
endangerment which many youtubers agree
is a huge issue on the platform why
would you not want them on your side
this doesn't make any sense unless of
course you believe that Matt Watson had
a different motive in mind
[Music]
and I'm not one of these people that
says Oh get a real job being a youtuber
isn't a real job I don't think that at
all
20 minutes lay down you know when
monetization bro
yeah here you go get a part-time job
uber uber looks good for you Matt
Watson's demonstrable lies deception and
dishonesty should confirm him as an
unreliable narrator his dubious behavior
reeks of someone with a hidden agenda an
agenda which becomes more obvious with
Matt's call-to-action in his expose I
hope with the video evidence that I have
that more people find out about adverts
being played on videos like this and
that YouTube it's the bed ten times
worse than they did in 2017 Matt's plan
to protect children on YouTube is to
incite a mass boycott of YouTube's
advertisers guys please contact them
trust me these companies care people
care don't worry if this sounds
ludicrous to you you're correct but it
kind of makes sense if you're all riled
up and bash your head against the wall a
few times
Matt's rationale is to force YouTube to
protect kids by hitting them where it
hurts in their wallets because remember
the only time that YouTube is going to
do something is when it starts to hit
their pocket when it starts to hit their
their wallet and the only way to get
them to respond is through their wallet
and the only way to hit Google and hit
YouTube is where it hurts in their
wallet nevermind the point that YouTube
is already making an effort to stop
predators Matt is suggesting that
hundreds of thousands of YouTube
creators across the entire site lose
revenue because of a few unmoderated
comment sections completely out of their
control matt is suggesting that rather
than flagging and reporting the abusive
videos we take money away from innocent
creators so that YouTube will flag and
report abusive videos if you're not
quite up to speed on how YouTube ads
work companies pay YouTube every time
one of their ads gets placed on a video
and the revenue then gets split between
the creator and the platform YouTube and
its creators exist in a symbiotic
relationship this is the primary reason
why inciting ad boycotts makes no sense
because to stab at the heart of YouTube
you must first drive the blade through
thousands of innocent channels even if
YouTube took 100 percent of the revenue
Matt's plan would still be totally
nonsensical YouTube is one of the few
massive websites that is not publicly
traded on any stock exchange as I
mentioned in previous videos
no one knows whether YouTube is even
profitable it's clear at this point that
Google does not keep YouTube running as
a lucrative venture they support YouTube
because of its enormous market share in
online video what you too lacks in
profit in more than makes up for in
influence YouTube itself may not bring
in the big bucks for Google but what it
does bring in is the customers who will
for this reason YouTube will likely
never have to worry about financial woes
as long as Google stays in business
which is why advertiser boycotts hold no
actual leverage every time this happens
the platform gets impacted far less than
the creators who don't have the
financial padding of a trillion dollar
company at some point it seemed that
Matt cared more about punishing
youtubers than punishing predators he
demonstrated this with his repeated
insistence that any youtuber who
disagreed with inciting an ad boycott
was greedy you know when one position
broke when youtubers like nerd City
attempted to reason with Matt on these
issues he responded with total
collegians the community was on his side
for the first few days people were
sharing the video we were stopping by
his chat and saying like you know how
can we help thank you for what you did
nerd City is here okay who's a nerd city
I gotta look all these people up people
like myself and Leon lush and keemstar
we're reaching out to him and saying hey
man we're on the same page here
what you found is a problem and YouTube
needs to address it but pump the brakes
on the contacting advertisers that is
not gonna solve the problem that's just
gonna injure YouTube like potentially
fatally Matt just kept dismissing
anything that youtubers were saying to
him about like don't contact advertisers
like don't do this yet that's that's the
nuclear option his stubbornness Beach
started to become the problem like he
pretended he was listening and he would
ask act like alright man I want to talk
yeah I'd love to talk
and he would put someone on live to talk
on discord and then once they would say
something he didn't like
he just you know put his hands over his
ears and said sorry no no no what I'm
doing is right and you're just greedy
and YouTube is gonna have to suffer for
this this means that youtubers are gonna
suffer unfortunately the only way to get
YouTube to do something about this is to
hit the where it hurts and that's in
their wallet there was never a point
when Matt elaborated on how his plan was
more effective than just manually
reporting the Predators the rhetoric in
his streams was akin to that of a
political rally featuring lots of
sloganeering dogmatic statements and
emotional appeal I mean this is
disgusting disgusting comment I'm
disgusted I'm disgusted I'm angry how
does this exist that's all I have to say
disgust it I've been more emotional in
this video that I've wanted to be I
wanted to be more collected and calm
Matt used to stream almost exclusively
as a way to galvanize his audience into
contacting brands at times have felt
like pressuring advertisers to pull
their funding was the only thing Matt
cared about yes dude that's what I'm
talking about we did it
thanks for bringing it to our attention
Jamie our team is aware in investigating
this material good now at this point
some of you may be starting to realize
that Matt Watson wasn't quite the noble
vigilante that he originally appeared to
be unfortunately for YouTube too many
people were unable to see through the
illusion the public outrage sparked by
Matt's video was astounding to say the
least by morning it had skyrocketed to
the top of our videos becoming one of
the most widely shared videos in the
history of the site within a week of its
upload more than 70 news articles had
reported on the controversy with most
directly linking Matt's video to readers
with all this considered Matt Watson had
single-handedly incited possibly the
most circulated controversy in the
history of YouTube in terms of initial
media coverage only logan paul's most
infamous controversy was comparable in
scale
Matt's video was reported on so
extensively that it raises the question
of how exactly it spread so far as I
mentioned previously many high-profile
youtubers have covered the issue of
child endangerment before yet they
hardly received any mainstream coverage
if you want to compare apples to apples
in 2018 a French youtuber with hundreds
of thousands of followers uploaded a
video covering the same topic as mad
with coincidentally the exact same
hashtag why didn't this video spawn 70
articles or hit the front page of Reddit
what made Matt's video different well
aside from the language barrier it's
highly likely that Matt Watson employed
some rather sneaky tactics to nudge his
video in the right direction
Matt published his video at 11:27 p.m.
Eastern Time which is very late in the
evening by YouTube's standards most
youtubers choose to upload in the
afternoon or early evening so they can
capitalize off-peak Internet traffic
Matt deliberately published his video
after most people had gone to sleep a
poor strategy for YouTube views but a
necessary strategy for what he likely
had planned approximately 40 minutes
after Matt published his video on
YouTube he posted the link to read it
about 90 minutes after that he begins
live
streaming on his YouTube channel where
he links his viewers to the reddit post
so that they can upload it link in the
chat will upload them yeah that's a good
idea actually know what I'm gonna stay
on the chat right now okay guys it's up
so I'm gonna post a link over here in
the window post that's my post so yeah
I'll poke that all you can this is a
strict violation of the solicitation
rule on our videos and should have led
to the post removal however at around
1:00 a.m. on a weekday most of the mods
were probably asleep and the violation
went completely unnoticed
Matt's initial karma injection was
enough to push the video to the front
page and after that point the reddit
hive mind
did the rest almost by design the video
was inundated by a furious wave of
outsiders who had little to no
understanding of how YouTube works and
before the YouTube community could
respond the video was already too big to
fail the media coverage of Matt Watson's
video was as dubious as any other aspect
of the controversy dozens of
publications jumped on a bandwagon to
elevate Matt's video as if he made a
groundbreaking discovery this issue had
been discussed by YouTube commentators
for years why did everyone decide to get
outraged by it now was the word wormhole
just a trigger for people to suddenly
pay attention
last spring I was able to discuss the
issue of child predation with anxiety
war who has become the modern-day Chris
Hansen of YouTube through his years of
experience in identifying and
confronting predators he identified that
the most dangerous sites for children
are instant messaging apps like snapchat
and the now defunct kik which allow
predators to communicate directly with
children will yeah of the victims that
contact me in unity they tell me where
they were
the perpetrator etc I've never heard of
YouTube a messing it doesn't exist I'm
sure it happens I'm called quite a bit
but it's mostly just a service like
snapchat and kink YouTube's direct
message system was buried in the video
manager for years and in 2018 that
removed the future entirely content wise
apps like Instagram and tic toc are far
more dangerous for children than YouTube
with Instagram ranked as the leading app
in giving kids depression among other
psychiatric issues and tick tock
continually luring unaware kids to
injure themselves in ridiculous
challenges both of these apps also have
an easily accessible instant messaging
feature which allow predators to speak
directly to minors as far as child
endangerment goes YouTube should be far
from the top of anyone's list of the
most dangerous apps for kids yet the
media seems to treat YouTube far more
harshly than any of these other sites
apps like tic toc are often portrayed as
fun and quirky you never see any outrage
mobs trying to incite an ad boycott of
snapchat or Instagram YouTube certainly
has its fair share of issues with its
handling of children but to scrutinize
them while simultaneously ignoring far
more dangerous sites is either dishonest
or downright foolish is this all just
another case of boomers being boomers
maybe so but something else about the
media's coverage of Matt's video is far
harder to explain
out of all 73 articles written about the
controversy not one featured any
interview with Matt every one of the
articles either cites the video itself
or a different article covering the
controversy only two out of the 73
articles even mentioned reaching out to
Matt for an interview this contradicts
Matt's own claims of supposedly
contacting media outlets himself I've
written a report and I'm sending that
report out to every news outlet that I
possibly can I get that nowadays our
standards for journalistic publications
are at an all-time low but this is just
ridiculous
usually when reporting on a story it's
common practice to base it off some sort
of credible research from a verifiable
expert in their domain not some unknown
dude who made an angry
video but even in the off chance that
you do decide to platform a fringe
weirdo with no credentials whatsoever
you should at least be able to interview
the guy and have him elaborate on his
more extraordinary claims of course most
of these publications probably did reach
out to MADD which presents an even
stranger implication that Matt Watson
outright refused to be interviewed you
know I just want to create some
awareness for this I want to try and get
this hashtag trending I have I concealed
my identity when I did it because I have
emailed several news outlets BuzzFeed
and stuff like that and so my concern
with contacting the FBI or the police is
that would someone like myself be
implicated by simply sending the
information to them or the recordings to
them that have these sort of borderline
the thumbnails in them could I be
implicated in something so BuzzFeed as
an example I can send something to them
anonymously and they will protect my
identity
BuzzFeed as an example they will protect
my identity so I feel like by sending it
to them you know I've started the
process here we're talking about this
stuff somebody's talking about Fox News
I don't like fox news why would the
leader of a major social movement turn
down the free publicity from appearing
in dozens of articles from major
publications for someone seemingly so
passionate about the issue someone who
claims to be just a concerned citizen
doing the right thing what would you
have to lose by answering a few
questions for reporters all I'm doing
here dude is I'm just trying to make
some awareness about this whole thing
I'm just trying to create awareness for
this you guys are helping to create
awareness for this we're all creating
awareness for this right now
we have one single solitary purpose for
being here right now and that is to
bring awareness to this issue hashtag
YouTube wake up anyone in Matt's
position should have been fully
cooperative with the media unless of
course they had something to hide
[Music]
another aspect of the whole situation
that most people missed was Matt's
inconsistent outlook of corporate
accountability throughout his whole
campaign he had a remarkable ability to
flip-flop between a staunch opponent of
corporate abuse to an outright boot
licker Nestle was quick to pull their
ads from YouTube amidst the controversy
despite undergoing numerous lawsuits for
using child slavery to harvest their
cocoa beans Disney also pulled their ads
over concerns of child exploitation
despite notoriously exploiting children
for years in their Chinese toy factories
Matt Watson seemed oblivious to all of
this as he actively aided both of these
companies in his suppose admission to
help children no matter who you are no
matter what your politics are no matter
what your skin color is about protecting
children that is intrinsic to human
nature to protect children hey pal you
just blow in from stupid town eventually
pretty much all of these companies
quietly return to YouTube a few weeks
after the controversy had blown over
like most corporate stunts it was all
just smoke and mirrors so much for
boycotting Child Exploitation it turns
out that YouTube's proverbial wallet
runs very deep and eight thousand dollar
refunds aren't a steep price to pay when
you make fifteen billion in annual
revenue ultimately Matt's whole plan of
forcing an Advocaat amounted to nothing
more than inconveniencing innocent
creators for a few weeks the advertisers
predictably returned and everything went
back to normal like how it always does
after any YouTube controversy yet
another example of why ad boycotts on
YouTube make no sense whatsoever and
Matt's whimsical double standard of
corporate abuse was yet another example
of his suspicious behavior
[Music]
so let's once again visit the strange
topic of Matt's old videos although they
were ignored by practically every major
news outlet the YouTube community
quickly gathered them as ammunition to
defend the platform from his deception
some of you have probably seen this clip
where Matt allegedly harasses a girl in
the sidewalk yeah interested in shooting
in that adult video most youtubers
utilize this clip to reach the
conclusion that Matt was an unscrupulous
creep and a failed content creator
however diving deeper into Matt's past
content reveals that many YouTube
commentators had missed the greater
context of his origins the few mentions
of his channel in articles and forum
posts reveal that Matt started on
YouTube by making men's health videos he
was perhaps most known for his no fat
blogs which he uploaded to the Matt's
what it is channel the same account that
would eventually host the YouTube wake
up video and his subsequent streams
Matt's original account dates back to
2016 1 year later Matt would open up a
new account called totally uncreated to
which he would upload what he described
as comedy videos be sure to check it out
over on Mike omni-channel totally
uncreated this is the channel that
spawned Matt's more questionable content
which was later circulated by the
YouTube commentators most of whom would
assume that the content was genuine
Matt's eventual reddit history would
contradict this theory and imply that
his entire catalogue of videos on both
channels were attempts at ironic satire
now I found myself kind of browsing
through a lot of your old videos you
know really got me wondering you know
what happened you know you haven't
posted anything in close to 5 6 months
and I found a comment that she had
pinned I think on your most recent video
that kind of announced that that you
were done man
or you were done the whole YouTube thing
in mysteriously the old Matt's what it
is videos were archived and re-uploaded
by an anonymous channel a week after the
controversy had subsided although the
nature or purpose of this channel is
unknown it is rather strange that it not
only archived Matt's old videos prior to
their sun deletion but chose to
re-upload them only after they served
little purpose to discredit him
ultimately Matt's old content serves as
yet another wrinkle in the tapestry of
confusing circumstances around him and
provides further reason to doubt his
motives for starting the controversy
[Music]
On February 19th just 48 hours after
arriving on the scene Matt streamed on
YouTube for the final time so that's it
man
I think we're said thank you all you
know that's all I have his name man
he's own after the stream went dark
Matt Watson disappeared from YouTube the
YouTube wake up Twitter account which
was presumably operated by Matt remained
active until the beginning of March
before also falling dormant Matt's last
known online activity can be found on
this reddit account on February 22nd
three days after his final stream Matt
posted a long rambling mostly incoherent
comment on the newly minted YouTube wake
up subreddit in the post he generalizes
the mounting criticism as slanderous and
continues to parrot the same rhetoric
about youtubers being greedy he then
goes on to sanctimoniously lecture us
about the dangers of social media
presumably as a means of accounting for
his future absence as of July 1st 2019
Matt Watson has vanished from the web
any details about his personal life or
current whereabouts remain a mystery to
this day
later in 2019 the Coppa controversy once
again placed YouTube's child safety
standards in serious doubt despite Coppa
providing Matt with ample incentive to
return he has thus far decided to remain
a poltergeist to the digital world
leaving the rest of us to wonder what in
the world just happened when we come
back we will discuss the alternative
theories of what Matt was really trying
to accomplish by making YouTube wake up
[Music]
people wake up okay
this kpop stuff it's evil and I want it
off of my radio station and I want to
offer my television
YouTube Geographic is brought to you by
keeps hair loss prevention and by
viewers like you
thank you
[Music]
hi are you interested in shooting an
adult video why are you running I mean
this is disgusting I can't believe it
man
rejected again and to think it's only
because I'm bald hi I'm dr. spiral and
I'm here today to talk about keeps the
easiest and most affordable innovation
in baldness prevention technology
millions of men make the mistake of
taking their hair for granted until it's
too late
once you go bald your self-worth flies
out the window faster than my medical
license everyone knows that hair is the
only true source of a man's power which
is why baldies burned through thousands
on tacky wigs smelly tonics and painful
implants keeps will help you battle
baldness before it's too late no other
fda-approved hair loss product is more
affordable and you can visit an online
doctor right now to get your medication
shipped directly to your door
so try keeps today for up to 90%
effectiveness at reducing and stopping
the symptoms of hair loss visit keeps
calm /m Pleming for 50% off your first
order
that's ke EPS calm slash and lemon
please buy the product you guys I can't
take any more of these ad boycotts
[Music]
the prevailing narrative regarding the
YouTube wake-up controversy is pretty
much everything that was reported by the
mainstream media the general public
assume that Matt was simply acting as a
Good Samaritan and exposing the issue as
part of his civic duty most people
especially the ones on reddit assume
that Matt was portraying these issues
fairly and honestly the reddit traffic
in heavy media coverage were thought to
be organic and a result of people
passionately caring about the issue by
demanding accountability from YouTube
for those outside the YouTube scene
Matt's mission to contact advertisers
seemed like a reasonable enough method
to inspire change and the subsequent
advertiser boycott came as a logical
consequence of Matt's well-intentioned
campaign for almost everyone aware of
the controversy this was a satisfactory
explanation for the sequence of events
however as we discussed previously
delving deeper into the details of the
situation reveals a lot of strange
inconsistencies that place the
mainstream Theory into serious doubt the
following theories will attempt to
account for the most dubious
discrepancies more specifically
analyzing Matt's behavior to deduce his
true motivation for inciting the YouTube
wake up controversy successful YouTube
channel and one of the two things they
recommend was to be super high energy
given the sequence of events the first
Theory many would consider is that Matt
Watson wanted to get revenge on the
platform for some unknown reason based
on his apparent hatred for YouTube
specifically and his unwillingness to
cooperate with youtubers in any capacity
it's weird to say but I want to make it
look bad for YouTube I want to make it
look very bad for YouTube the crux of
this theory comes from the inconsistency
of Matt's overall knowledge of the
platform he had no problem setting up a
live stream but claimed to have no idea
how to edit monetization settings then
you can go back and watch my streams
where people are telling me yo do this
is monetized and I'm saying how do I
turn this off I literally didn't know
how to turn it off he seemed very
familiar with watching certain channels
but somehow neglected obvious examples
of those same youtubers supporting the
cause he claimed to represent even
though Matt's behavior reflected someone
with years of experience
on the platform he would frequently play
dumb to his audience acting ignorant to
very basic features on the site there
was some sort of unusual behavior going
on here there's some sort of glitch in
the algorithm of course many
commentators would eventually expose
that Matt did in fact spend at least two
years making content before the
controversy content which he
deliberately tried to obfuscate from
public view much of YouTube's commentary
community seem to reach the consensus
that Matt Watson was a failed youtuber
who manufactured the controversy for
views and attention but regardless
YouTube has taken action they're taking
the stuff down
stop trying to milk this for attention
after spending years trying and failing
to grow his channel Matt began to resent
YouTube and it's more successful
creators with that resentment eventually
boiling over into a full-on vendetta
eventually he hatched a plan to sabotage
the platform and it's greedy creators
YouTube wakeup was a result of Matt
actively seeking revenge on YouTube
while the rogue youtuber Theory may
explain Matt's abrasive attitude towards
other creators it doesn't account for
many other discrepancies first of all
the commentator consensus that Matt
manufactured the controversy for fame
doesn't hold up when you factor in his
subsequent disappearance from the
internet as a whole
Matt clearly acted with grander
motivations than simply furthering his
own status additionally this theory
creates inconsistencies with Matt's
level of competence throughout the whole
process are we supposed to believe that
Matt is capable of manipulating
thousands of people to do his bidding
but he can't figure out how to make
people watch his YouTube videos if he
knew how to exploit reddit karma to
boost his viewership why not just use
that tactic on his existing content this
theory paints Matt as a failed youtuber
who grew disillusioned with the platform
yet he gained almost 20,000 subscribers
in more than a million total views in
just two years of making videos which is
far more successful than most channels
at that point with that being said his
apparent motive for hating YouTube
appears much more flimsy suggesting that
he had a different incentive than just
getting revenge on the popular kids and
even if he did start the controversy
because he hated the platform why was
his
campaign so successful in particular
every year dozens of videos come out
seeking to expose YouTube's dirty
dealings to the general public and so
far
Matt's video stands alone as the only
YouTube expose to garner significant
mainstream attention was a Dalek
coincidence or just dumb luck could be
either but it's far more likely that a
few hidden entities had vested interest
in Matt's video succeeding I am once
again asking for your financial support
in leftist communities online there has
been a fixation at how YouTube's
algorithm has promoted right-wing
content many argue that YouTube has
inadvertently created a pipeline in
which viewers are recommended political
content that gradually radical has them
so you'll start with one or two videos
of a red-haired college feminist and end
up on videos about demographic
replacement this is the thesis of ideas
like the pewdiepie pipeline as well as
the motivation for them to produce their
own content while Matt's video predates
the pewdiepie pipeline this asserted
rabbit hole was covered extensively in a
research paper by Rebecca Lewis for data
in society published in September of
2018 the abstract summarizes the review
of YouTube rather well YouTube is a
principal online news source for young
people which is why it's concerning that
YouTube a subsidiary of Google has
become the single most important hub by
which an extensive network of far-right
influencers profit from broadcasting
propaganda to young viewers this study
received not just news coverage but was
also the foundation for this video by
youtuber three arrows which has since
accumulated nearly 1 million views how
is this relevant to Matt Watson you may
ask well nearly one month after Matt
Watson swore to never return again he
made a reappearance on Reddit YouTube's
algorithm is the mirror of its average
user start with PewDiePie and with start
with Joe Rogan and with Schapiro
start with news and with less than two
months later Matt Watson posted again in
the subreddit this time in a thread
calling for action its title reads turn
off your ad blocker go to the sub
reddits take screenshots of adds an
extra little content
send the screenshots to companies and
ask why they're promoting veganism Matt
Watson simply commented on this post yep
I can attest that this strategy works
there are a number of reasons as to why
this is significant firstly one has to
remember
that at this point met had already
essentially been forgotten no one seemed
to recognize him when he commented even
though he referenced his grand
accomplishment
so one should view this as his mask off
moment how he behaves when he's no
longer in the public's eye but you also
have to take this into consideration
with the context of his content before
the YouTube wakeup scandal on his comedy
channel he made videos mocking the Man O
spear where he would parody with a
pickup artists he clearly had a vested
interest in opposing these fringe
communities and these comments revealed
that he views ad boycotts as a
proportionate response to them so it's
not out of the realm of possibility that
he had an ulterior motive additionally
it provides an explanation for his
disdain of other youtubers he comments
on a thread mocking boogie2988 YouTube
and its content creators are one in the
same they only give a book about money
enforcing policies nah these content
creators are such self-centered pieces
of trash there is a direct correlation
between how garbage their content is and
how frequently you'll find them wincing
about SJW boogeyman coming for their
adsense remember when he first released
his video he framed himself as an
outsider but as that facade began to
slip away he revealed that he was fairly
knowledgeable about the commentary
community what this tells us about Matt
is that going into the controversy he
was familiar with the youtubers he was
screwing over and surprise surprise most
of them are associated with the anti sjw
rabbit-hole many have interpreted Matt
as simply not understanding the
collateral damage he was going to cause
but since he's acknowledged both their
past and present influence he can't
claim ignorance and this by proxy sheds
a doubt on his stated motivations it's
now entirely plausible that he could
have been concerned trolling inciting a
PR disaster under false pretenses to
undercut the financial earnings of
propagandists and then after it was all
said and done he could sit back and
laugh as they've all been relegated to
becoming Ober drivers uber uber looks
good for you looking at his post from
before the controversy revealed that it
was Jordan Peterson that led him to
broaden his focus from just the mono
sphere sometimes it feels like the mono
spirit anti SJW types permeate every
corner of YouTube it seems like no
matter what video I watched in the
comments are infected with angry
lords whining about feminism liberals
and or whatever minority group they can
scapegoat for the world's woes it's
depressing at this point it's worth
clarifying that if all this is true Matt
had an extremely flawed plan by broadly
attacking all content creators he
skewered not just the right wingers but
LGBTQ creators and leftists remember
YouTube is a platform where pretty much
anyone can upload videos this makes it
an invaluable tool for financially
unstable people to have a voice as
YouTube becomes less sustainable as a
job the people being affected the most
are the ones who can't afford to do it
anymore if Matt's intention was to
combat right-wing pundits the best way
to avoid this collateral damage would
have been to fight them using the
algorithm instead he chose to do the
more woke thing of pandering to
millionaire ad agencies but with all
that said the uncertainty of this theory
and his general incompetence makes it
impossible to confirm sure he was
celebrating his victory after the fact
but he always stopped short of saying he
did it intentionally and it's not like
he wasn't aware of the left as he was
going to hurt prior to the controversy
he'd advised an aspiring left-wing
creator to only do it for fun because it
didn't pay like it used to and
throughout all his messages despite
posting in and leftist community he
never seems to talk about class so maybe
it's possible that Matt wasn't motivated
by feelings of class solidarity maybe he
did have ulterior motives but ones that
were even more covert than his reddit
account let on what if Matt Watson
wasn't trying to be a proletariat hero
but instead the exact opposite a
corporate shill
[Music]
one of the strangest aspects about Matt
that is thus far gone unexplained is the
lack of any substantial information
about his identity aside from those who
deliberately remain anonymous
nearly all leaders of social movements
have some sort of paper trail that
reveal aspects about their personal
lives as far as we know Matt Watson is a
blank slate how can this be the case for
someone who spent days openly
broadcasting his name and face for the
whole world to see throughout all this
exposure you'd think that at least one
youtuber or one redditor or one news
reader would know the guy in person and
be able to divulge any sort of details
about his identity all this seems
extraordinarily bizarre until you
consider the possibility that Matt
Watson as we know him doesn't actually
exist each spring media companies and
advertisers hold annual meetings called
up fronts up fronts were originally used
by television networks to partition and
sell commercial time for brands to
market their products eventually up
fronts expanded to the digital space and
companies now use these meetings to
determine their online marketing budget
for the upcoming year
YouTube has typically hosted their up
front in the first week of May but
upfront negotiations across all networks
spanned into the beginning of March this
time frame is significant to our theory
because it indicates that brands must
outline their tentative advertising
budgets by the end of February the time
period that just so happens to align
with YouTube wake up it also happens to
align with another infamous YouTube
controversy in February 2017 Wall Street
Journal reporter Jack NICUs would Co
publish an article accusing PewDiePie of
anti-semitism much like Matt Watson's
campaign The Wall Street Journal
seemingly manufactured a controversy out
of thin air much like Matt's video the
article was manipulative and deceptive
and also featured a strange emphasis on
advertisers as well as YouTube supposed
responsibility to micromanages creators
one month later
Jack nica's would target advertisers
head-on by using a singular screenshot
to accuse YouTube of running ads on
racist content he would curiously omit a
key detail that the video was monetized
not by the uploader but by a music
copyright claim
rather than blame the music companies
who frequently operate above the law on
YouTube NICUs would instead blame
YouTube itself and instigate the first
ad pocalypse in the following months
YouTube would implement sweeping changes
to the revenue system on the site most
notably mass D monetization introduction
of the hidden channel rating system and
the subsequent suppression of edgy
content a tremendous impact all from a
single misleading article if you're
noticing a pattern here it's probably
that springtime on YouTube is starting
to bring a vigorous bloom of dubious
controversy and advertiser boycotts do
you think it's possible that these two
prickly plants may have sprouted from
the same seed it's possible that Matt
Watson was no ordinary garden-variety
plant he may very well have been an
industry plant a fulcrum through which
brands attempted to leverage cheaper ad
rates on YouTube the entire ad boycott
was just a smokescreen for companies to
renegotiate their existing contracts
with YouTube and return at a lower rate
at the time of the YouTube wakeup
controversy
many companies had ample incentive to do
so ever since the first ad pocalypse
YouTube had been secretly subsidizing
numerous brand safety agencies
third-party companies who worked with
major corporate clients to ensure that
their ads would not appear alongside
questionable content in hopes of
enticing major brands back to the
platform YouTube essentially refunded
the charges of these third-party
services so brands could access them for
free at the end of 2018 YouTube
disclosed that they would no longer be
footing the bill and that advertisers
would now have to pay for brand safety
services on their own this announcement
frustrated both the third-party services
and their clients who now both faced
unexpected budgetary complications you
have to imagine that heading into the
new year some of them were looking to
recoup their losses On February 6th
Business Insider published an article
revealing that YouTube was no longer
subsidizing brand safety agencies just
11 days later Matt Watson would initiate
the YouTube wakeup controversy while
heavily M
I think that YouTube is unsafe for
brands but I have multiple examples of
big name brands we're talking dodge ram
disney in one video I can't imagine what
these brands are gonna say about their
content appearing on these kinds of
videos think about the consequences of
this you have a Disney advert you have a
McDonald's advert appearing on a video
where a creep is time stamping a little
girl if news outlets start reporting
this and brands like McDonald's find out
that their advertisement is appearing on
these videos YouTube will do so
[Music]
there's no denying that these companies
have incredible reach and influence open
slate was notably partnered with Group M
the largest advertising company in the
world and one that claims to be
responsible for a third of all ads
broadcasted they certainly have the
means to pull some strings in the
mainstream media especially in an age
where news outlets have been revealed to
be increasingly corrupt these days most
news agendas are determined not by
what's newsworthy but by what's
profitable for those running the show
and YouTube wake up sought to make many
companies a lot of money this theory
explains how Matt's campaign got so much
coverage the brands had always been
planning to pull out they just needed an
angry activist to provide them with the
opportunity it's possible that the key
to solving the mystery of Matt Watson
may have been hiding in plain sight this
whole time this whole thing was never
about protecting kids some brands even
admitted it practically all of them
eventually returned to YouTube likely at
a cheaper rate than before as for Matt
well as far as we know his entire
channels story and persona is a
fabrication the reason we can't find
anything on his identity is that Matt
Watson as we know him doesn't actually
exist
Matt Watson was just the alias of a
covert agent hired to do a very specific
job by an unknown entity once he
accomplished his mission he no longer
had any reason to stick around in the
description I've included all the social
media contact information for every
brand that appears in my video and I've
included a time stamp for where exactly
that brand appears in my video of course
like the other theories the industry
plant hypothesis doesn't account for
everything if Matt really was a hired
agent then how could you explain his
older content it seems rather ridiculous
to suggest that he was planning the
stunt for more than two years
if the advertisers needed an
unsuspecting plant to orchestrate a
controversy then why select one with any
sort of history attached to his account
especially one with history as bizarre
as Matt's old content additionally at
with any conspiracy containing a ton of
moving parts this theory potentially
involves a lot of people that would need
to be kept quiet and finally if it was
really that easy for companies to take
advantage of YouTube shouldn't we have
seen a bunch of Matt Watson's popping up
all over the place at least for now that
remains to be seen
[Music]
unfortunately we may never know Matt
Watson's true intentions with the
YouTube wake-up campaign at the end of
the day all of our theories are nothing
more than educated guesses and unless we
get some serious testimony from any of
the parties involved all we can do is
wonder speculation aside it is fairly
evident from the facts of the case that
we should be skeptical of Matt Watson's
self-proclaimed mission to protect
children the circumstances surrounding
his behavior were too suspicious and
contradictory for us to buy into the
official narrative it's obvious that
Matt had some hidden agenda but what
exactly that agenda was may forever
remain up for debate one thing for
certain is that the fulfillment of
Matt's agenda came at the expense of
both YouTube and its creators the
meteoric success of YouTube's wakeup may
be indicative of changing tides in the
digital landscape the controversy likely
represents one of the mounting
consequences of YouTube's de facto
monopoly on long-form user-generated
content as the site continues to scale
beyond the limits of human control the
platform will keep finding itself in
more precarious positions these days
it's more than just creators who are
growing increasingly frustrated by their
lack of options with billions in
corporate transactions on the line
YouTube is under more pressure than ever
to perform to a certain standard in the
future YouTube may further transform
into a battleground between clashing
corporate Titans while the rest of us
are just along for the ride
ultimately Matt Watson exposed YouTube's
most confounding issue of all not their
lack of child safety but their lack of
communication perhaps the biggest factor
that made YouTube's wake up so
successful was YouTube's complete
failure to inform the public on hardly
anything happening on the platform
YouTube is a site that likes to shroud
itself in a cloud of mystery so that
they can operate invisibly to the prying
public eye they thrive within an
information vacuum leaving the general
public totally ignorant to even the
site's most basic features it was this
ignorance which Matt Watson exploited to
transform a simple expose into one of
the biggest controversies the site had
ever seen his blatant dishonesty should
have been immediately debunked yet it
was only detected by the most savvy
creators on the platform
the vast majority of observers accepted
Matt's emotionally-charged rhetoric as
the truth and YouTube paid the price
honesty is a two-way street the more you
hide from the public the less likely
they are to trust you after burning so
many of us for so long it's hard for
anybody to trust YouTube these days
YouTube wake up serves as the ultimate
indictment to the site's severe
transparency issue it also serves as an
indictment against the site's
total lack of direction or leadership
it's safe to say that over the past half
decade YouTube's internal
decision-making can only be described as
hapless whether it's their persistently
baffling and unwanted policy changes
through totally inconsistent enforcement
of the rules or their preferential
treatment for the vapid celebrities at
the top of the site many of YouTube's
issues are completely self imposed
brought about mostly by their inability
to think proactively about future
obstacles lately the direction of the
site seems about as coherent as a
headless chicken like how YouTube has
spent the past five years dedicating an
entire section of the site to
kindergarteners only to scramble and
panic when shockingly targeting them
with ads was against the law much of
YouTube's aimlessness could be
attributed to their pitifully weak
leadership in the event of a crisis like
the Matt Watson controversy most
youtubers have nowhere to turn for news
and guidance who is supposed to be
YouTube's spokesperson in situations
like these the anonymous Team YouTube
Twitter account Susan with her biannual
blog posts how is it that a guy like
Matt Watson a single angry dude in his
bedroom is a more effective leader and
communicator than anyone at YouTube
YouTube wake up once again proves that
unless the platform makes some major
changes in their management they will
continue to get eaten alive by companies
who know they can get away with it until
YouTube's administration can learn to
effectively communicate its goals and
solutions to the greater public cowardly
decision-making will continue to
threaten the stability of the site in
the future we may either look back on
Matt Watson as an anomaly or as the
beginning of a far more sinister trend
I'm sure that every creator would hope
that controversies like YouTube wake up
remain in the past Matt Watson sparked a
wave of rage and disgust by supposedly
uncovering a war
nobody realized that the real wormhole
would be the mystery behind Matt himself
whoever he was and whatever he was doing
here Matt Watson will go down as
YouTube's most infamous red herring
[Music]
you